[IE]><script>window.isIE = true</script><!
[endif] Skip to main content contentType : // xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?
Generator: Adobe Illustrator 16.2.1, SVG Export Plug-In .
SVG Version: 6.00 Build 0) Space Search Subscribe RSS (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) All About Space Magazine (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) Why subscribe?
Your monthly guide to stargazing & space science Try a single issue or save on a subscription Issues delivered straight to your door or device From $3.99 (opens in new tab) View (opens in new tab) News Astronomy Spaceflight The Moon Our Solar System Skywatching More Videos Search for LIfe Technology Entertainment Reference SpaceX Expert Voices Forums All Topics Subscribe to "All About Space" Magazine!
Space.com Store About Us Web Notifications Trending Artemis 1 updates Best Telescopes Best Star Projectors Best Binoculars Lego Star Wars deals Best Drones Russia-Ukraine war space impacts Full Moon Calendar Solar System Planets Night Sky Tonight Calendar Space is supported by its audience.
When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission.
Here’s why you can trust us .
Home News Science & Astronomy Magnetic Fields May Muzzle Milky Way's Monster Black Hole By Nola Taylor Tillman published 14 June 2019 Magnetic fields may keep the Milky Way's supermassive black hole quiet.
(opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) In this image, streamlines showing magnetic fields overlay a color image of the dusty ring surrounding the Milky Way's supermassive black hole.
Warm material falling toward the black hole creates a Y-shaped structure, with the black hole lying near the intersection of the two arms.
(Image credit: Dust and magnetic fields: NASA/SOFIA; Star field image: NASA/Hubble Space Telescope) Magnetic forces may explain why the supermassive black hole at the heart of the Milky Way is so much quieter than its counterparts in other galaxies.
New observations, taken by NASA's Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) mission, reveal unprecedented information about the strong magnetic field lines at the center of the galaxy.
The strong gravitational pull of the Milky Way's central black hole, which is known as Sagittarius A*, dominates the heart of the galaxy.
In general, as material falls into black holes, the dark giants emit high-energy radiation that reveals their presence.
Compared to black holes seen in other galaxies, however, the Milky Way's heart is relatively quiet, emitting far less radiation than expected.
Understanding how black holes interact with their magnetic fields can help scientists understand the difference between active and quiet black holes.
Related: Images: Black Holes of the Universe Whether they exist around refrigerator magnets or black holes, magnetic fields are invisible.
To study the ones connected to Sagittarius A*, researchers relied on SOFIA, which is a modified Boeing 747SP aircraft.
Specifically, they employed SOFIA's newest instrument, the High-resolution Airborne Wideband Camera-Plus (HAWC+), to track polarized far-infrared light emitted by dust particles.
Because dust grains line up perpendicular to magnetic fields, astronomers were able to map the shape and infer the strength of the magnetic field around the black hole.
Combining the new map with mid- and far-infrared images of Sagittarius A* revealed the direction of the magnetic field.
While some of the material from the surrounding ring of gas and dust is falling toward the black hole, the magnetic field also directs material away from the hungry giant, researchers said.
"The spiral shape of the magnetic field channels the gas into an orbit around the black hole," HAWC+ principal investigator Darren Dowell, of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said in a statement .
"This could explain why our black hole is quiet while others are active," added Dowell, lead author of a new study reporting the SOFIA results.
Sagittarius A* is the closest supermassive black hole to the sun and therefore provides a good opportunity to learn how the mysterious giants function.
"This is one of the first instances where we can really see how magnetic fields and interstellar matter interact with each other," said study co-author Joan Schmelz, an astrophysicist at NASA Ames Research Center in California.
"HAWC+ is a game-changer."
The results were presented at the 234th semiannual meeting of the American Astronomical Society, which was held this week in St. Louis.
Photos from SOFIA, NASA's Flying Telescope (Gallery) Black Hole Quiz: How Well Do You Know Nature's Weirdest Creations?
Our Milky Way Galaxy: A Traveler's Guide (Infographic) Follow Nola on Facebook and on Twitter at @NolaTRedd .
Follow us on Twitter @Spacedotcom and on Facebook .
Join our Space Forums to keep talking space on the latest missions, night sky and more!
And if you have a news tip, correction or comment, let us know at: community@space.com.
Nola Taylor Tillman Contributing Writer Nola Taylor Tillman is a contributing writer for Space.com.
She loves all things space and astronomy-related, and enjoys the opportunity to learn more.
She has a Bachelor’s degree in English and Astrophysics from Agnes Scott college and served as an intern at Sky & Telescope magazine.
In her free time, she homeschools her four children.
Follow her on Twitter at @NolaTRedd Sign Up for e-mail newsletters Get breaking space news and the latest updates on rocket launches, skywatching events and more!
Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors Thank you for signing up to Space.
You will receive a verification email shortly.
There was a problem.
Please refresh the page and try again.
By submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions (opens in new tab) and Privacy Policy (opens in new tab) and are aged 16 or over.
MORE FROM SPACE... 1 Atlas V rocket launches 2 communications satellites to orbit 2 SpaceX delays launch of Starlink satellites to make way for Crew-5 astronaut flight 3 Elon Musk re-ups offer to buy Twitter for $44 billion: reports 4 Pictures from space!
Our image of the day 5 China begins recruitment for 4th batch of astronauts Space is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher.
Visit our corporate site (opens in new tab) .
About Us (opens in new tab) Terms and conditions (opens in new tab) Privacy policy (opens in new tab) Cookies policy (opens in new tab) Accessibility Statement (opens in new tab) Topics (opens in new tab) Advertise with us (opens in new tab) Web notifications (opens in new tab) Careers (opens in new tab) © Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036.
Begin comScore Tag End comScore Tag Google Tag Manager End Google Tag Manager document assets - added by the article itself
