[IE]><script>window.isIE = true</script><!
[endif] Skip to main content contentType : // xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?
Generator: Adobe Illustrator 16.2.1, SVG Export Plug-In .
SVG Version: 6.00 Build 0) Space Search Subscribe RSS (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) All About Space Magazine (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) Why subscribe?
Your monthly guide to stargazing & space science Try a single issue or save on a subscription Issues delivered straight to your door or device From $3.99 (opens in new tab) View (opens in new tab) News Astronomy Spaceflight The Moon Our Solar System Skywatching More Videos Search for LIfe Technology Entertainment Reference SpaceX Expert Voices Forums All Topics Subscribe to "All About Space" Magazine!
Space.com Store About Us Web Notifications Trending Artemis 1 updates Best Telescopes Best Star Projectors Best Binoculars Lego Star Wars deals Best Drones Russia-Ukraine war space impacts Full Moon Calendar Solar System Planets Night Sky Tonight Calendar Space is supported by its audience.
When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission.
Here’s why you can trust us .
Home News Science & Astronomy The Milky Way's Monster Black Hole Has a Cool Gas Halo — Literally By Charles Q. Choi published 5 June 2019 (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) This artist's impression shows a ring of cool interstellar gas around the supermassive black hole at the center of the Milky Way, Sagittarius A*.
(Image credit: NRAO/AUI/NSF; S. Dagnello) For the first time, astronomers may have imaged the cool disk of gas surrounding the gigantic black hole at the heart of the Milky Way, a new study finds.
The research may improve knowledge about how black holes grow and influence their surroundings.
At the hearts of most, if not all, galaxies are supermassive black holes millions to billions of times the mass of the sun.
These enormous structures can have profound effects on the galaxies they call home — for example, they can blast out jets of matter at nearly the speed of light that can travel across an entire galaxy, likely shaping the galaxy's evolution.
Related: The Strangest Black Holes in the Universe The location of the black hole at the center of the Milky Way, Sagittarius A.
(Image credit: F. Baganoff et al./NASA/CXC/MIT) At the center of our galaxy lies the supermassive black hole Sagittarius A* , often abbreviated Sgr A*.
This giant is about 4 million times the mass of the sun and about 14.6 million miles (23.6 million kilometers) in diameter.
Around Sgr A* swirls a ring of debris known as an accretion disk .
The gas within this disk experiences so much friction that it can reach 18 million degrees Fahrenheit (10 million degrees Celsius), according to researchers on the new study.
Previous research has detected X-rays near Sgr A*, likely given off from this hot gas.
Prior research suggests that Sgr A* was also surrounded by relatively cool gas, with temperatures ranging from about minus 280 degrees F to 17,500 degrees F (minus 170 degrees C to 10,000 degrees C).
However, it remains uncertain how much cool gas surrounded Sgr A*.
"If we want to learn about what processes are important and not important for how a black hole gets fed, we need to know the environment around the black hole well," study lead author Elena Murchikova, an astrophysicist at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, told Space.com.
"But the contribution of cool gas on a black hole has never been studied."
Now Murchikova and her colleagues suggest that they may have imaged the cool accretion disk around Sgr A* for the first time.
"This should help improve our understanding of how accretion onto black holes works," she said.
Scientists used the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) in Chile to analyze the center of the Milky Way.
Specifically, they focused on wavelengths of light given off by hot ionized hydrogen gas that could make it all the way from the heart of the galaxy to Earth, with very little loss of these light signals along the way.
An image from ALMA shows cool hydrogen gas flowing around the Milky Way center's supermassive black hole, Sagittarius A*.
The red portion of the gas is moving away from Earth and the blue portion is moving toward Earth.
The crosshairs show the location of the black hole.
(Image credit: ALMA (ESO/NAOJ/NRAO), E.M. Murchikova; NRAO/AUI/NSF, S. Dagnello) The researchers detected a disk of cool gas about 20,000 times the diameter of Sgr A*, and estimated it was about one-tenth the mass of Jupiter, or about 30 times the mass of Earth.
Future research should aim for higher-resolution images of the cool gas around black holes, and how this gas interacts with hot gas around black holes, Murchikova said.
"We want to find out as much of what is going on around a black hole as possible," she noted.
The scientists detailed their findings (opens in new tab) online June 5 in the journal Nature.
Physicists Closer to Solving Mystery of Weird Glowing Ring Around Milky Way's Black Hole Milky Way's Monster Black Hole Belches Big, But Why?
The Future of Black Hole Photography: What's Next for the Event Horizon Telescope Follow Charles Q. Choi on Twitter @cqchoi .
Follow us on Twitter @Spacedotcom and on Facebook .
Join our Space Forums to keep talking space on the latest missions, night sky and more!
And if you have a news tip, correction or comment, let us know at: community@space.com.
Charles Q. Choi Contributing Writer Charles Q. Choi is a contributing writer for Space.com and Live Science.
He covers all things human origins and astronomy as well as physics, animals and general science topics.
Charles has a Master of Arts degree from the University of Missouri-Columbia, School of Journalism and a Bachelor of Arts degree from the University of South Florida.
Charles has visited every continent on Earth, drinking rancid yak butter tea in Lhasa, snorkeling with sea lions in the Galapagos and even climbing an iceberg in Antarctica.
Visit him at http://www.sciwriter.us Sign Up for e-mail newsletters Get breaking space news and the latest updates on rocket launches, skywatching events and more!
Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors Thank you for signing up to Space.
You will receive a verification email shortly.
There was a problem.
Please refresh the page and try again.
By submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions (opens in new tab) and Privacy Policy (opens in new tab) and are aged 16 or over.
MORE FROM SPACE... 1 SpaceX launches 52 Starlink satellites, lands rocket on ship in Pacific 2 Astronauts fly Albert Einstein doll to demo physicist's 'happiest thought' 3 World Space Week: Sustaining astronomy in an age of satellite megaconstellations 4 1st Russian cosmonaut to launch with SpaceX heads to space station 5 Massive space rock impact could have 'instantly' created the moon Space is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher.
Visit our corporate site (opens in new tab) .
About Us (opens in new tab) Terms and conditions (opens in new tab) Privacy policy (opens in new tab) Cookies policy (opens in new tab) Accessibility Statement (opens in new tab) Topics (opens in new tab) Advertise with us (opens in new tab) Web notifications (opens in new tab) Careers (opens in new tab) © Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036.
Begin comScore Tag End comScore Tag Google Tag Manager End Google Tag Manager document assets - added by the article itself
