[IE]><script>window.isIE = true</script><!
[endif] Skip to main content contentType : // xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?
Generator: Adobe Illustrator 16.2.1, SVG Export Plug-In .
SVG Version: 6.00 Build 0) Space Search Subscribe RSS (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) All About Space Magazine (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) Why subscribe?
Your monthly guide to stargazing & space science Try a single issue or save on a subscription Issues delivered straight to your door or device From $3.99 (opens in new tab) View (opens in new tab) News Astronomy Spaceflight The Moon Our Solar System Skywatching More Videos Search for LIfe Technology Entertainment Reference SpaceX Expert Voices Forums All Topics Subscribe to "All About Space" Magazine!
Space.com Store About Us Web Notifications Trending Artemis 1 updates Best Telescopes Best Star Projectors Best Binoculars Lego Star Wars deals Best Drones Russia-Ukraine war space impacts Full Moon Calendar Solar System Planets Night Sky Tonight Calendar Space is supported by its audience.
When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission.
Here’s why you can trust us .
Home News Science & Astronomy Tiny newfound 'Unicorn' is closest known black hole to Earth By Mike Wall published 21 April 2021 'The Unicorn' lies a mere 1,500 light-years from us and is just three times more massive than the sun.
(opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) Artist's illustration of the tiny black hole candidate known as "The Unicorn" tugging on its companion, a red giant star.
(Image credit: Ohio State illustration by Lauren Fanfer) Astronomers have apparently found the closest known black hole to Earth, a weirdly tiny object dubbed "The Unicorn" that lurks just 1,500 light-years from us.
The nickname has a double meaning.
Not only does the black hole candidate reside in the constellation Monoceros ("the unicorn"), its incredibly low mass — about three times that of the sun — makes it nearly one of a kind.
"Because the system is so unique and so weird, you know, it definitely warranted the nickname of 'The Unicorn,'" discovery team leader Tharindu Jayasinghe, an astronomy Ph.D. student at The Ohio State University, said in a new video the school made to explain the find.
Related: The strangest black holes in the universe "The Unicorn" has a companion — a bloated red giant star that's nearing the end of its life.
(Our sun will swell up as a red giant in about five billion years.)
That companion has been observed by a variety of instruments over the years, including the All Sky Automated Survey and NASA's Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite.
Jayasinghe and his colleagues analyzed that big dataset and noticed something interesting: The red giant's light shifts in intensity periodically, suggesting that another object is tugging on the star and changing its shape.
The team determined that the object doing the tugging is likely a black hole — one harboring a mere three solar masses, based on details of the star's velocity and the light distortion.
(For perspective: The supermassive black hole at the heart of our Milky Way galaxy packs about 4.3 million solar masses.)
"Just as the moon's gravity distorts the Earth's oceans, causing the seas to bulge toward and away from the moon, producing high tides, so does the black hole distort the star into a football-like shape with one axis longer than the other," study co-author Todd Thompson, chair of Ohio State's astronomy department, said in a statement (opens in new tab) .
"The simplest explanation is that it's a black hole — and in this case, the simplest explanation is the most likely one."
That explanation, likely though it may be, is not set in stone; "The Unicorn" remains a black hole candidate at the moment.
Very few such super-lightweight black holes are known, because they're incredibly hard to find.
Black holes famously gobble up everything, including light, so astronomers have traditionally detected them by noticing the impact they have on their surroundings (though we did recently get our first direct image of a black hole , thanks to the Event Horizon Telescope).
And the smaller the black hole, the smaller the impact.
But efforts to find extremely low-mass black holes have increased significantly in recent years, Thompson said, so we could soon learn much more about these mysterious objects.
"I think the field is pushing toward this, to really map out how many low-mass, how many intermediate-mass and how many high-mass black holes there are, because every time you find one it gives you a clue about which stars collapse, which explode and which are in between," he said in the statement.
Jayasinghe and his team report the detection of "The Unicorn" in a paper that's been accepted for publication in the journal Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society.
You can read it for free at the online preprint site arXiv.org (opens in new tab) .
Mike Wall is the author of " Out There (opens in new tab) " (Grand Central Publishing, 2018; illustrated by Karl Tate), a book about the search for alien life.
Follow him on Twitter @michaeldwall.
Follow us on Twitter @Spacedotcom or Facebook.
Join our Space Forums to keep talking space on the latest missions, night sky and more!
And if you have a news tip, correction or comment, let us know at: community@space.com.
Mike Wall Senior Space Writer Michael Wall is a Senior Space Writer with Space.com (opens in new tab) and joined the team in 2010.
He primarily covers exoplanets, spaceflight and military space, but has been known to dabble in the space art beat.
His book about the search for alien life, "Out There," was published on Nov. 13, 2018.
Before becoming a science writer, Michael worked as a herpetologist and wildlife biologist.
He has a Ph.D. in evolutionary biology from the University of Sydney, Australia, a bachelor's degree from the University of Arizona, and a graduate certificate in science writing from the University of California, Santa Cruz.
To find out what his latest project is, you can follow Michael on Twitter.
Sign Up for e-mail newsletters Get breaking space news and the latest updates on rocket launches, skywatching events and more!
Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors Thank you for signing up to Space.
You will receive a verification email shortly.
There was a problem.
Please refresh the page and try again.
By submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions (opens in new tab) and Privacy Policy (opens in new tab) and are aged 16 or over.
MORE FROM SPACE... 1 SpaceX launches 52 Starlink satellites, lands rocket on ship in Pacific 2 Astronauts fly Albert Einstein doll to demo physicist's 'happiest thought' 3 World Space Week: Sustaining astronomy in an age of satellite megaconstellations 4 1st Russian cosmonaut to launch with SpaceX heads to space station 5 Massive space rock impact could have 'instantly' created the moon Space is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher.
Visit our corporate site (opens in new tab) .
About Us (opens in new tab) Terms and conditions (opens in new tab) Privacy policy (opens in new tab) Cookies policy (opens in new tab) Accessibility Statement (opens in new tab) Topics (opens in new tab) Advertise with us (opens in new tab) Web notifications (opens in new tab) Careers (opens in new tab) © Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036.
Begin comScore Tag End comScore Tag Google Tag Manager End Google Tag Manager document assets - added by the article itself
