[IE]><script>window.isIE = true</script><!
[endif] Skip to main content contentType : // xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?
Generator: Adobe Illustrator 16.2.1, SVG Export Plug-In .
SVG Version: 6.00 Build 0) Space Search Subscribe RSS (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) All About Space Magazine (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) Why subscribe?
Your monthly guide to stargazing & space science Try a single issue or save on a subscription Issues delivered straight to your door or device From $3.99 (opens in new tab) View (opens in new tab) News Astronomy Spaceflight The Moon Our Solar System Skywatching More Videos Search for LIfe Technology Entertainment Reference SpaceX Expert Voices Forums All Topics Subscribe to "All About Space" Magazine!
Space.com Store About Us Web Notifications Trending Artemis 1 updates Best Telescopes Best Star Projectors Best Binoculars Lego Star Wars deals Best Drones Russia-Ukraine war space impacts Full Moon Calendar Solar System Planets Night Sky Tonight Calendar Space is supported by its audience.
When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission.
Here’s why you can trust us .
Home News Science & Astronomy Rare 'Missing Link' Black Hole Apparently Found By Mike Wall published 27 February 2015 (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab) The newly discovered object NGC 2276-3c (shown in inset) appears to be an intermediate-mass black hole, astronomers say.
(Image credit: X-ray: NASA/CXC/SAO/M.Mezcua et al & NASA/CXC/INAF/A.Wolter et al; Optical: NASA/STScI and DSS; Inset: Radio: EVN/VLBI) A newfound cosmic object may be a long-sought missing link that could help flesh out the black hole family tree.
The object appears to be an intermediate-mass black hole (IMBH), astronomers say.
Called NGC-2276-3c, it lies in an arm of the spiral galaxy NGC-2276, about 100 million light-years from Earth.
IMBHs are thought to contain the mass of a few hundred to a few hundred thousand suns.
The black holes are therefore intermediate in size between stellar-mass black holes and the behemoths that lurk at the hearts of galaxies, which can harbor billions of solar masses.
[ Images: Black Holes of the Universe ] Researchers have long hypothesized the existence of IMBHs, which are believed to be the seeds from which supermassive black holes grow.
But the midsize structures have proven elusive thus far.
"Astronomers have been looking very hard for these medium-sized black holes," study co-author Tim Roberts, of the University of Durham in the United Kingdom, said in a statement .
"There have been hints that they exist, but the IMBHs have been acting like a long-lost relative that isn't interested in being found."
Roberts and his colleagues — led by Mar Mezcua of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics in Cambridge, Massachusetts — studied NGC-2276-3c in X-ray light using NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory and in radio light using the European Very Long Baseline Interferometry Network.
Combining these observations with the known relationship between black hole mass and luminosity in X-ray and radio wavelengths, the team calculated NGC-2276-3c's mass: the equivalanet of about 50,000 suns.
"We found that NGC 2276-3c has traits similar to both stellar-mass black holes and supermassive black holes," said co-author Andrei Lobanov, of the Max Planck Institute for Radio Astronomy in Bonn, Germany.
"In other words, this object helps tie the whole black hole family together."
The researchers also noted that the black hole is firing off a powerful radio jet, which extends about 2,000 light-years out into space.
Young stars are missing along this path for 1,000 light-years or so, suggesting that the jet has cleared out clouds of gas that otherwise would have condensed to form stars, researchers said.
A separate study delves into the possible origin of the NGC 2276-3c black hole.
A team of researchers led by Anna Wolter, of the National Institute for Astrophysics in Milan, Italy, used Chandra observations to determine that the equivalent of five to 15 suns are forming every year in the NGC 2276 galaxy.
This high rate suggests that the galaxy recently collided with a neighboring dwarf galaxy.
(Mergers generally spur star formation.)
So NGC 2276-3c may actually have taken shape near the core of a dwarf galaxy, astronomers said.
Both studies will be published in the journal Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society.
Follow Mike Wall on Twitter @michaeldwall and Google+ .
Follow us @Spacedotcom , Facebook or Google+ .
Originally published on Space.com .
Join our Space Forums to keep talking space on the latest missions, night sky and more!
And if you have a news tip, correction or comment, let us know at: community@space.com.
Mike Wall Senior Space Writer Michael Wall is a Senior Space Writer with Space.com (opens in new tab) and joined the team in 2010.
He primarily covers exoplanets, spaceflight and military space, but has been known to dabble in the space art beat.
His book about the search for alien life, "Out There," was published on Nov. 13, 2018.
Before becoming a science writer, Michael worked as a herpetologist and wildlife biologist.
He has a Ph.D. in evolutionary biology from the University of Sydney, Australia, a bachelor's degree from the University of Arizona, and a graduate certificate in science writing from the University of California, Santa Cruz.
To find out what his latest project is, you can follow Michael on Twitter.
Sign Up for e-mail newsletters Get breaking space news and the latest updates on rocket launches, skywatching events and more!
Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors Thank you for signing up to Space.
You will receive a verification email shortly.
There was a problem.
Please refresh the page and try again.
By submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions (opens in new tab) and Privacy Policy (opens in new tab) and are aged 16 or over.
MORE FROM SPACE... 1 Pictures from space!
Our image of the day 2 Pregnancy in space: Studying stem cells in zero gravity may determine whether it's safe 3 Best cameras for low light photography 4 Best cameras for photos and videos 2022 5 Major solar flare disrupts Hurricane Ian disaster response Space is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher.
Visit our corporate site (opens in new tab) .
About Us (opens in new tab) Terms and conditions (opens in new tab) Privacy policy (opens in new tab) Cookies policy (opens in new tab) Accessibility Statement (opens in new tab) Topics (opens in new tab) Advertise with us (opens in new tab) Web notifications (opens in new tab) Careers (opens in new tab) © Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036.
Begin comScore Tag End comScore Tag Google Tag Manager End Google Tag Manager document assets - added by the article itself
